Getting open. Welcome, everybody. 

So, we'll start with the apologies. I guess we have Hazel. Everyone else seems to be here, I think. So, could I have a little mover, please? Andrew, just before you do, I had to leave the meeting at 1:30 to attend a future-proof meeting, so sorry about that. My apologies from me. Good as gold. Thanks, Jim.

So, shall we include that in the motion as well? If someone would like to move, please. Maybe it might be Lou. Thanks, Susan. 

All in favor, please say aye. Aye. Contrary, no. That's carried. 

Disclosure of members' interests. Do we have any today? No? Won't. We've moved on to item four: late items. Any late items? No late items. 

So, confirmation of the order of the meeting. No changes? I don't see any need for change. We do have a number of van geese to announce at the meeting today, but they're well within the required time. So, yes, I'm hoping those are the earthly of the required time. Thanks, crime. A second? 

Thanks, Susan. I think what she is all in favor, please say aye. Aye. Contrary, no. Carried. 

Okay, item six, which is confirmation of the minutes from 18 February. If we all take those as being read, anything raised from those minutes? 

Graham speaking. My diary is showing me that I was at their meeting, but my name's not recorded. 

Right, Özkan. I was going to bring that up too, so you think there's some mistake? Thanks, Bruce. 

Okay, so I'm sure we can have that remedied. Sam? 

Yes, we'll make the changes. Thank you. 

Okay, so that change. Could I have a mover for the minutes to be received as a trim quick? Rico, please. Thank you, Marcus. 

Sikandar, I figured it. Thanks, Bruce. 

All in favor, please say aye. Aye. Contrary, no. Carried. Thank you. 

Item seven: Jason. Has Jason joined us? He has preceded. Seemed nodding off. Hi, Jason. 

Here. You're doing good? Thank you. Great. The floor is yours. 

Okay, Sam. I don't think we hit as we hit a shoe there trying to get the presentation. Is that right? Oh no, it seemed a sharing. Brilliant. Perfect. Thanks, Sam. 

Good morning or good afternoon, sorry, everyone. Thanks for allowing me time just to give you a quick update on where we are as a sector for tourism and particularly for Waipa District. 

So, a report has obviously been provided to you and prepared, which was our last six months' performance at the end of 31st December 2019. As you would have seen, Waipa District Council was going through significant growth, pretty much one of the fastest growing regions for us with regards to tourism impact. You were experiencing double-digit growth pretty much down through visitor expenditure and also commercial accommodation. 

But we are here today to discuss this, that obviously a bit of a change in the dynamic given COVID and the impact for the tourism particular sector. 

Next slide, Sam. Perfect. 

So, just first a couple of slides, obviously I'm just covering off some data. We're now receiving international and national data on a weekly basis from the government and also from the airlines. 

So, of no surprise, obviously since COVID lockdown and international travel restrictions were put in place, international visitor arrivals into New Zealand have been dropping at a very sharp rate. We still do have a line connectivity, which I will go through because we are still maintaining what we call a baseline service for Connie across the world, mainly for repatriation flights but also for cargo and service across the country as well. 

Next slide, Sam. 

So, weekly card transactions. Again, no surprise, obviously overall our visitor expenditure is down significantly. But when you do look onto the left top five, obviously food, liquor, and pharmacies, we are still seeing some humor in some obviously weekly growth and expenditure compared to all our other types of expenditure in transactions as well. 

So, the impact for us as a sector, again, look, I mean everything, all of this has been reported, but just to cover off in summary, we were already impacted through the loss of China group travel. We've started in the second to last week of January. 

So, with that, all of our international-facing products, our hotels, our motels, our Airbnb, are merely impacted by that because many are trying to group travel. Actually, they did stay on the Waipa District. They were our fourth largest visitor market behind Australia, North America, and UK Europe. 

It did shut us down pretty much once international travel restrictions hit us, and the visitor economy covers more than just the tourism operators. Again, with mention accommodation, it also impacts retail, hospitality, transport providers, our operators, of course, but also event organizers in major venues. 

And of course, Mystery Creek and the anti-drone in Lake Hope are key event platforms for Waipa District. We have had significant job losses and business closures across tourism. 

I have done underneath that last bullet point, look, the immediate business impact that we have been coaching our businesses through and helping them get through. Some have gone to what we call temporary or seasonal closure. 

So, again, we have a lot of seasonality in tourism. Many who would close for winter have closed, but those that potentially have never closed before, we've suggested they go into hibernation. And so that's what we're calling temporary seasonal closures. 

We've had a number of businesses, you know, Hobbiton was obviously one of the most public reported in the media, but again, all our motels, hotels, retail, hospitality have pretty much reduced service and staff. 

There's only essential services operating, as we know. But again, with alert level 3, we do see some opening up potentially in the hospitality sector for Waipa anyway. 

And then the last, obviously, implication for us is we have here a number of businesses who are apparently closing. Not only are these lost definitely to the tourism industry to try and bring people back when we don't hit products, but also particularly for those vulnerable communities with some of these operators have been going for many years. 

Things seem sure. Have you got examples of what businesses are struggling and like who isn't closing by who is closing and how it is impacting her in Waipa? 

Yeah, so for Waipa, it was mainly being your hospitality, potentially some of your retail, and also accommodation. So we've had many, nearly all of your accommodation has pretty much gone into hibernation or closure. 

They're calling it temporary closure, but some have been able to access the wage subsidy, which is great. But again, what we're going to see is the impacts are longer than the 12-week wage subsidy right now. 

So it's post twelve weeks what we're quite concerned about. We have been lobbying nationally the government, and I think that's all sectors, not just tourism, around potentially extending the wage subsidy for twenty weeks because it will take a lot to restart the tourism sector again. 

People's propensity to travel is quite low. We will travel locally and potentially we will travel intra-regionally, so staying within the region. But to try and stand up the domestic travel market is going to be a long haul. 

They were looking in at a six to twelve months recovery plan for that. 

Great. So lastly, look, I mean, and no surprise here, this was just like we do for industries. People know we all fit. 

So from the tourism perspective, when we respond, obviously we're providing the industry support right now at a national level, regional level, and also a local level. 

But then we have to work at the Commerce helpers and associations, and all local government have been great in actually supporting us with what we call the business and community support site for tourism businesses. 

And then lastly, we were obviously partnered with the civil defense network around providing welfare support, not just for tourism operators. Again, it's also been utilizing tourism operators. Many of our caterers have now been repurposed into providing food services pretty much or supporting the food banks and actually cooking meals. 

We also have a number of our transport operators and tourism being run basically requisitioned now to provide transport options and actually getting people around, such as essential workers. 

Many of the staff potentially we've been redeploying into sort of things, need work through providing security and welfare and call center as well. 

So not only are we also working with sort of fence, we're also putting stuff into beer as well. 

Even though we're obviously dealing with COVID, does it does for you to be aware there are obviously continuing issues that were going on with some with COVID and with the tourism industry. 

First up was domestic airline connectivity. So lucky and New Zealand has been pretty open that they will not be restarting and salute level once we meet with them. 

You don't weekly just to see how we will try and stay in the industry back up again. They're going to focus very much on what we call an incremental restart. 

So it's doing a what's in briefs strategy across the country. So potentially maybe only two or three flights into Hamilton good day. 

But again, it's to try and give their reach across the whole network first before they can actually stand up and have a full schedule like we have seen how to Hamilton import particularly over the last three to four years. 

Airline connectivity internationally is still continuing. So those are just some a summary of some of the ones that are still flying. 

So again, New Zealand are still connecting into North America and Hong Kong into Australia. Fiji Airlines are still flying into Fiji on the daily service. 

Qatar has probably used the most to try and repatriate Northern Hemisphere travelers back to their homes through Qatar. And then also Korean Airlines is still operating today service as well for future. 

Again, New Zealand is saying they will be focusing very much on the domestic market first. They will traditionally be a domestic airline for the first six to twelve months. 

And domestic also includes Australia in the Pacific. American Airlines so far has been the only one who would meet with who plans to return to New Zealand from October 2020. 

So they have put a stake in the ground to say when they will start flying into New Zealand again. 

Now, the reason why I was raised international airline connectivity is because it will take this country at least two to five years before we ever go back to the type of connectivity we had as a country previously before lockdown. 

So again, it's going to be a very long burn for us as a country to regain the international visitor arrivals we have seen in the past. 

Air traffic control services are up for review. The reason why I just put Bettany was just to let everyone know there were no Waipa reports or air fields, but particularly Hamilton Airport isn't impacted. 

But for us in the central North Island, Rotorua is one that is going to be impacted around potentially the closure of air traffic control tower services there will mean potentially that we will be reading the domestic network through Toronto and Hamilton. 

So unfortunately for all to do as last, it could be our gain. 

And then lastly, we've still got the investigation underway around for Cardi White Island. 

So the WorkSafe investigation should be coming to a close shortly. There will be impacts on the tourism suppliers around adventure tourism for this country. 

And also we will be awaiting Qualmark, which is their accreditation program particularly around health and safety for the country soon. 

This means that Field Days, we are now filled days is going online. So from the 30th of June for two weeks, Field Days will be providing a virtual exhibition space. 

There is similar to other international events to offer this type of experience. Again, it is a trial, but we do hope to bring Field Days back in 2021. 

Obviously, not only is the largest major event for Waipa, but it's definitely forward or Waipa with regards to eating on a compact. 

We would do to host New Zealand tourism awards in November. There has been postponed until next year. 

We will receive the tape for that. 

Exploring trends, these are what we call our two main international trade shows. They've obviously been delayed. 

Trains 2021, which is the main time when we actually sell the Waipa to the world, we will not be having until maybe June next year. 

So just awaiting on a date for that. 

Two major convention centers were due to open this year at TPI and Christchurch, which potentially is the one there. 

We'll be taking a lot of business away for our stroll for business events. That has now been delayed for another year. 

And of course, the Musial International Convention Center, we will not know the reopening date of there until they work through their final insurance claims. 

So again, by having these two convention centers not operating means there are places like Cool Ones in the Mystery Creek Event Center are going to be filling the gap for national and international conferences for the short term, which is actually a good opportunity for us again as a region. 

Postcode, but we also do still have events planned. 

So the major events, obviously the National Waka Ama is at this stage still planned to take place. 

And we also have our first major event for the region, the ICC Women's Cricket World Cup scheduled for the 8th of February. 

Again, this one will particularly be decided by around October-November whether we international travel restrictions have lifted to enable some of the players to come. 

Otherwise, they will have to go into isolation until the Cricket World Cup can be held. 

So what we have seen goods financially or other parts of the Tito is that events have been more postponed for Waipa and for the wider Waikato region rather than completely canceled and not returning. 

So there is some positivity for us as we do see this as the lead sector turn to recovery economically and socially for the district. 

It's sliding over spot. We have a three-tiered response plan. 

Obviously, this is no stability everyone else right now. We have a mitigate process with draconian. 

Now we didn't have a restart phase, and then we have a reimagine phase. 

So initially in the response phase, no different to pronounce lots of briefings, lots of support. 

We obviously them face-to-face briefings across all the sector long before the shutdown. 

And now we've moved to the virtual space, so we're still doing everything we can see at a national level to try and make sure you can exit small business support for the region. 

Some of the gap right now at a government support and out of the support, that's what I can provide as it doesn't cover any employees for a hundred employees plus. 

So that's quite the pointy end of town we call it for most of our region for our big employers. 

Again, wage subsidy okay, but on the outside of there, there's actually no large industry supports. 

We'll be pushing it through government to try and unlock some of that if this lockdown continues. 

We've been doing one-on-one operator check-ins. We have 240 listed operators with us. 

And so again, these are daily or weekly check-ins by all our teams to make sure you want to be able to access business advice and some of the wage support. 

We've been doing webinars, and we've now moved in the last two weeks into workforce redeployment. 

So again, we've been taking some organizations or employers that have maybe at least 5 to 10 staff members displaced through to Hobbiton, who had one of the largest at around 270, and actually redeploying them and offering them redeployment options into the kiwifruit industry. 

We placed a hundred and ten staff into kiwifruit with transport from Hobbiton, as well as the avocado industry, which will be the next seasonal workforce. 

We'll be standing up until the end of the year, but put stuff into supermarkets, sort of fence security, and also they've been providing some services from home. 

But again, what we are going to see over the next two weeks, and we're starting to measure, there is the full-on peaks of people that we cannot redeploy. 

There potentially will be out of work. So I think it's currently a survey underway, and we'll be updating all councils in the government around the overall impact for tourism in Waipa. 

All things in under the restart phase. 

So again, we want to congratulate local government because obviously I'm getting some of those shovel-ready projects through with the crown infrastructure partners for the consideration is a great win for the region, but potentially for the sector. 

And pretty much every district has put up around 1 to 2 tourism projects as part of shovel-ready. 

So again, we do need to focus on the future and how we will restart the region. 

Research, we were already in market and about to finish up our domestic perceptions and major research. 

This is now becoming quite timely for us and will help us inform around how we will try and bring back the domestic travelers into the region based on some of the research we've undertaken. 

We're also working on a major business events restart campaign. 

So that planning's been underway for a couple of weeks so that when we're ready to go, we can push go on there. 

We do see events and business events and corporate travel as being the Kickstarter we need for economic and social recovery across the region. 

New developments, again, you've all got new developments going on potentially in your regions. 

Hidden Lake, obviously one of your newest hotels in Cambridge, opened on Christmas Eve. 

So glean during the team, we've been keeping in touch with quite a lot because they haven't been in operation very long. 

The Olympics are quite severe, so again, making sure that we still have some future developments and then we'll continue across the region and to take us through the next stage. 

Data and insights, I've touched on that now gone to weekly. 

So again, we're sharing that information into Waipa and now we've contributing to the Taraki can I make outlook as well, which is great. 

And then lastly, the Mighty Local campaign was launched two weeks ago, and it's definitely around the restart phase. 

Things seem so Mighty Local again was a partnership with ourselves, Waipa, all the chambers of commerce, OTR, Mu-2, and obviously Cambridge Chamber of Commerce, plus the Waipa Chamber of Commerce. 

All our councils, the business associations, it also exists in some communities and all our regional insights. 

We're in phase one. So for the last two weeks, we've been promoting businesses with contactless delivery, promoting people that are still doing entertainment online or virtually from within Waipa. 

Recently from our beloved shifts, well-being, and for this week, we launched business stories. 

So again, we're starting to use this platform to promote some of the businesses and how they're pivoting into obviously response or looking at different opportunities for their business. 

So the idea is to try and give people hope during phase one. 

During phase two, which is obviously from alert level three, we will increase your takeaway and Ethan beam listings, and also essential services are starting to grow as well. 

In phase two, we will move more to a local phase. At the moment, it's a regional platform, but the idea is potentially people will be able to group the types of information and services available at a local level and at district level as well. 

And then phase three, which has been hopefully all travel restrictions are lifted, we will then activate the basically the buy local, eat local, event local, shop, visit, and explore within the region. 

And obviously, there's some partnership with many communities and business associations that already have local programs, such as Cambridge with their Totally Locally Cambridge campaign. 

So we're working with Kelly and the team around how we would try and push their program rather than this one once we get to phase three. 

They seem, and when it comes to how we will actually respond long term. 

So at the moment, we're in phase one, so we're calling it the hyper-local phase. 

So one to three months, we'll be pushing basically localism, everything to do with obviously how you purchase and interact with your local community. 

At phase two, which then we'll move into a three to six month break, we're estimating we can then start to do ensure regional travel. 

So we'll be targeting the drive market within the Waipa region. 

We hopefully starting to stand up community events again. They can happen at a local level, and regional business meetings might be able to begin again with social distancing at level three, which is what we're planning our scenarios for. 

Six to twelve months, we can then stand up the domestic market. 

There is wind potentially we will mainly focus on drive. 

So if you've heard me say before, 2.5 potentially 3 million people live within a three-hour radius of the Waikato region, including the region itself. 

So we'll definitely be focusing on the drive market. 

National beans will be returning as well as national meetings, and then eventually corporate travel, which again, business is quite a good lead for us with regards to the sector again. 

And then lastly, we're planning on one to two years before we actually start to see any sort of international impact again. 

Short-haul markets into Australia in the Pacific will open first, and then we will eventually move back into major events, international conferences, and starting to bring the corporate and leisure travel market into Waipa. 

So that's the timeframe. We are currently doing our scenario planning format. 

As we all know, it may change every week based on the other levels we have seen. 

And then lastly, reimagined. 

So you would have seen that last week, or actually two weeks ago as well, the government announced that there was a call to reshape and reimagine the tourism industry. 

So we have been pushing for the last two to three months with Tourism New Zealand and the Minister for Tourism around what we're calling a reimagining of tourism. 

When we go, there is our chance that this is more than a shock. That's actually a bit of a circuit breaker for the sector and for all business sectors for us all to look and see how could we do our businesses differently. 

We all knew that tourism was growing at quite an exponential rate, and there were some areas that were really feeling the pressure, such as Queenstown in Central Otago, in Cathedral Cove, some of our sites, Mount Amadito. 

So for us now, it's great to see the government taking this seriously. 

So we're now working with Tourism New Zealand to lead a new plan domestically and internationally, but also look at all these types of questions. 

You know, where are our previous visitor arrivals and spiritual growth right for the region? 

What will success look like for us for the future for a visitor market here? 

We move, I'll stick to from boom and bust again, no different to the food and fiber sector or any other business cycle. 

And lastly, how do we move to a more sustainable community-led tourism? 

And for us and the Waikato, what we call creating need benefit rather than just benefiting those that potentially we're making money out of tourism. 

We want to see communities thrive, and then they have the decision around what sort of tourism they want. 

So again, we will be moving out sixteen tourism opportunities plan, which many of you were involved in. 

We will now be developing a destination management plan, and it'll be happening nationally as well to try on what we call transform tourism for the better. 

So there is no such word as recovery now. 

We will not be receiving the same sorts of level of tourism as we did previously, but neither might we not have the same sorts of services and opportunities available in tourism as well post-COVID. 

So again, it is a good opportunity for us to look at transforming the sector. 

Look, and lastly, just obviously a call, I call it to all my local government partners. 

I really appreciate everyone having to promote your race relief for missions and installment policies, not just for the tourism sector but for all business. 

It's great to see you all continue with your resource-consumed crisis, maybe in a more delayed way. 

But again, the liquor and food licensing is going to be more important for us, particularly trying to stand up after alert level three. 

We still have the regional major event strategy activation. 

So again, we are still awaiting some decision from the Well Energy Trust about potentially having to establish a regional major event fund, which will actually assist all the districts to be able to bid for major events again and also to attract and bid new major events into our shoulder season across the region. 

And then lastly, again, just to thank you all for your continual funding to support the tourism industry. 

And then it would obviously be more important through restart in the reimagine phase. 

And again, the point I made earlier, we will not be recovering to pre-COVID levels for at least two to five years as a sector and as a region. 

That's pretty much it from me, I think. So, happy to take any questions. 

Thanks, Jason. That's, I got to say, that's a fantastic response to what must have been a massive shock to the industry. 

Yeah, and of course in Waipa and probably a lot of Waikato as well, domestic tourism is actually a lot bigger than international. 

So we really want to see, and as you have in your plan, that being worked on as soon as it becomes a possibility. 

But yeah, does anyone have questions? Just put your hands up. I can see you all clear. 

Okay, yes, thanks a lot, Jason. And yeah, fantastic effort, and I think being put in by all your team, you know, in this situation. 

A couple of questions. Well, the first one was that I noticed that in the regional major event strategy, there's a new funding partner mentioned. 

Is that the Well Energy relationship, or is it? 

Alright, great. Useful as well, Energy. 

Yeah, no, that's great. And the other thing is for your reimagining, you know, the future of tourism. 

I saw that you had your stakeholders listed. I didn't see the Department of Conservation being there. 

Not that they are a tourism operator, but most of them, you know, popular destinations, you know, I think Cathedral Cove, you know, they're actually managed by the department. 

And I just want to be worthwhile trying to get them around the table so that because I hear, you know, they worry about the pressure points that we were experiencing. 

And that, you know, just having their input, you know, might be beneficial. 

Absolutely. So you're sorry about their clear. 

The Department of Conservation are part of it. So it's actually a joint Tourism New Zealand and DOC review of tourism. 

And it's only because they both actually contributed to the national tourism LTL or strategy. 

So they are definitely part of it. We don't obviously have a lot of any national parks, but we do still have a lot of Crown Estate in some of the Crown Estate in our region, or obviously down our waterfalls and lake areas. 

So again, and on their rivers, we just, they will be engaging in that as well because we did obviously have some opportunities with DOC originally before COVID. 

So they're developing shore walls for the region and walks mentals. 

So there's some projects that we now have brought forward again to say Campbell DOC reconsider moving some of us. 

So, Mr. Marking, it's unspent history in Waipa. 

Do we have any other questions? 

This is just a huge thank you, Jason, to the support you have operators. 

You know, I have been, I figured a little myself and that, and the calls that I get from your team are very encouraging. 

It's very soothing. 

And just one of the things I just wanted to check in with you on, I let some, we do have a presentation a little bit later among the territory, and I see you've also given them some support, and that's really great. 

Who are reliant on a lot of the international visitors. 

And I guess it's lucky for us in some ways that there's not that many Waipa operators that are reliant on internationals. 

Monetary is probably one of them, perhaps our eyesight. 

So to a certain degree in servicing international guests. 

But do you think that there are any other aspects of Waipa that are going to be greatly affected with the internationals? 

Because it's really the biggest, you know, issues going to be. 

It's mainly going to be the sports, the sports coach. 

So I think if we can try and get some of the international sporting events back up and running as soon as possible, depending on travel restrictions, they would be the main impact for Waipa. 

But you are correct. Pretty much most of our beans, which are great, you know, operators, pretty much talk to the domestic market. 

And I still feel that, again, look at the Waikato expressway. The other work they potentially has been put forward for shovel-ready, even extremely nice way down to Pier Duty there. 

It's just all going to help that ease of domestic travel. 

And we definitely see the push from self-drive. 

Obviously, the motor home and caravan association, they're going to be another first leader and mover back into the region as well, which is fantastic. 

So working with them on a traveler around trying to get more people back into Waipa. 

So I think, again, your geographic location, your natural environment, and also your have been platform so hold you in a stronger position around obviously recovering compared to other parts of our region. 

Great. Okay, thanks very much for that. 

You've done an awful lot of work, and you've got a lot more in front of you, I can see. 

But that's great. And if we've got no more queries or we have a recommendation, do we have a mover, please? 

I think Marcus thinks. 

Clear. All in favor, please say aye. Aye. Contrary, no. Carried. 

Thanks very much, Jason. All the best things. 

Maybe I rely on you. Thank you. 

And thanks, Sam. Good. 

Weird. Yes, I see we have my sorry back, Morgan. 

What I see it, and also Kelvin and Andrew. 

I fear we'll get to you guys before long, but Mark from CEE, him with an airport. 

Yeah, the floor is yours. 

No, just like Jason, you've had a mess of change for your business. 

So yeah, it's good to hear you're going on. 

Thank you, Andrew, and thanks for the opportunity. 

Welcome to all of the elected members. 

Hopefully, we've got a presentation coming up, and it should be before you now. 

Look, today I've also got Scott Kindle, my finance manager, under one. 

So Scott will deal with a couple of the finance slides, and as most of what we have to talk to you about is in the realms of finance, useful to have him here. 

It's not quite the presentation I had intended to present a month ago, but as we know, a lot has changed, and a massive amount has changed for rail in the last three or four weeks. 

So the presentation is primarily, and if we can see, I move to the next slide, is primarily around the COVID-19 response for rail. 

But I thought, and there's about eight or nine slides, the key slides to take you through. 

And I think what you'll see is how we dealt with the crisis, what the implications have been for the group now and for the next 15 months, and in summary, that does shed some positive light at the end of the tunnel. 

Thanks, Sam. If we move on. 

So I guess the first point I think is useful to you've obviously received our six-month interim results. 

Some say you're only as good as your last results, but sadly that's not quite the case today. 

But look, we were traveling extremely well, very, very good first six months, and in fact, on target for a record financial performance under any measure of hourly. 

So for this financial year, but of course, the net led to our draft yes or why that you've also received, and then of course is now pretty much irrelevant. 

And I see that you ironically have an appendix letter to my chair, Barry Harris, about our why. 

And as you can imagine, we are working very quickly towards a revised is a why for the next three years, particularly the financials, but also there'll be some narrative change and some priority changing as well. 

We have completed a very detailed fifteen-month forecast through the 30th of June next year. 

That will form, of course, now part of the year one of the obvious. 

Oh, I so look, we have a presentation. The rail board and myself have a presentation to all shareholding councils in May, and by that stage, we will have finalized the new drafts. 

So moving on, moving on to the next slide. 

So I think now just looking at the impact, and look, very difficult to, well, it's very easy to explain in simple terms. 

It's had a massive impact on the business, but if I divide it into these four areas that are before you, of course, the first result is the aeronautical business in New Zealand. 

Complete issue, no suspension of flights. 

So for us, that was an immediate loss of income really from April, but from the last week of March, along with our general aviation, three Harris of flight school, basically, you know, 97, 98 percent loss of our aeronautical income overnight. 

Terminal plays, and we really operating as an emergency medical service only at the airport had the same impact on our property. 

But in fact, our property is our lifeline that I will come to. 

But again, really overnight impact on our tendencies. 

We're quite large landlords, as you know, and to date, and Scott will talk a wee bit about this, but to date we've had good support from our tenants. 

But we're early days, as we know, into the next sort of three to six months as businesses work through how they're going to operate and survive during this process. 

We've obviously suspended the terminal upgrade work, and I'll talk to that a bit further on, which of course was a major piece of work, approximately fifteen million dollars of proposed work. 

A hotel has been, so if we can just go back to the previous slide, Sam. 

The hotel impacted significantly as well. 

Fortunately, during April, it was taken over by the Ministry of Health as an isolation facility. 

It wasn't required. It was a backup to the Auckland hotels. 

Nonetheless, we have received and we are receiving payment for the use of the hotel by the government, but that ends really this week. 

And from then on, difficult times ahead, and we'll talk about that. 

And obviously, our people and all my team are working remotely. 

That's working very, very well. 

My sort of 11 or 12 on our immediate COVID team responds, but of course, the cafe install staff are at home unable to work. 

And part of the government subsidy, a risk of fire team does remain on site at this point. 

So that's really been the impact. 

What have we really tried to do about it? 

If we could move to the next slide. 

First of all, we very quickly, leading into probably two weeks before we move into level two and level three, or before we even knew what that meant, we had worked very closely with the board around a pandemic plan, how we would operate the business, and more importantly, started to look at some scenario and modeling. 

At that point, that Jason would have mentioned earlier on as borders such as China were closing to tourism. 

We also saw the writing on the wall for our own business. 

So that plan was developed and approved by the board before we even went into lockdown. 

We've completed significant cost reductions in the business. 

That's right across the business. 

Some major cost reductions in our expense lines, reductions pretty much across our business in terms of payroll, anything up to a 20 percent reduction. 

And the board have also taken a reduction in their director fees. 

We applied for and received the government wage subsidy across the group. 

And with the hotel, we worked through and are still working through with Get Park, but they've gone through a full restructuring exercise. 

A number of people have been made redundant, and a number have been retained under the government subsidy. 

But we have a meeting later this week with Chip Park to look at stage two. 

Airport association that we parlor was doing a major piece of work with central government to try and see what support, if any, there are for airport companies that have been significantly cut. 

We are long-term infrastructure owners, and to maintain the assets, so there's a piece of work going on in that space. 

We already covered the people. We can move to the next slide. 

The scenario modeling that I talked about there, I think the point that I will make here and come back to at the end is that most airport companies, particularly regional airport companies, are significantly hurt and hit now. 

We are fortunate that we made the decision five or six years ago that the board then, under the leadership of John Spencer and then implemented by myself and my team, we have, as you know, diversified the airport company, and that has, I guess, bought us time. 

So we have completed a very conservative model for argument's sake that assumes no in New Zealand activity of any meaningful sense before October this year. 

No, and then only a recovery of about 40 percent of passenger numbers through 2021 calendar year and well into 2022 before we have a positive EBITDA, really. 

So what is, and we've also taken a very conservative view of leases of early season ability to pay us, etc. 

No activity out of the hotel really for the balance of this Condor year. 

So very, very conservative but realistic modeling. 

Fortunately, we have a major land sale that is unconditional and very extremely good family, significant family multinational business that have agreed to further provide a letter of credit to the airport company, which gives me confidence to build the road, so to speak. 

So that delivers about two and a half million dollars of margin of free cash flow into the group early next year. 

So the reality is that we can get through this year and through to June 21 almost a slightly positive cash position. 

The balance sheet is taking a bit of a hit, and Scott will take you through that. 

But also, we have some work going on on Central Precinct, and again, we have the ability hopefully to settle some unconditional land sales with the same degree of confidence around fear the sureties, which will also feed some additional cash into the group. 

We've only utilized about 65 percent of our debt funding, and in fact, we have fear the facilities that we were intending to take anyway pre-COVID, and we will still take, which will take our funding up to about 30 million. 

And then we will have only utilized not much more than 50 percent of that by June next year. 

So most of the cash burn is funded out of our overdraft during this period, and then the land sales kept beckon, and we're back in positive space. 

Being said, very supportive and no issues there around funding. 

Next slide, please. 

So we had joined with Hamilton City, and I had spoken to Gary Diet and others around the obviously the crown infrastructure projects. 

We have put forward two applications. If you've had a chance to review the submission, you might be aware there are 23 projects we have submitted for the terminal redevelopment and also for an amalgam of a number of projects around the airport that deal with roading, lateral infrastructure, our wastewater plant, and various other aspects. 

Again, it's also worth about 11 million dollars. 

So we have put person, whether we're successful, who knows? 

But under the terminal redevelopment project, we're ready to go. 

Tenders have been received, and Emirate being evaluated the week of lockdown. 

Our consent is in with one with your council at the moment, and that's well underway. 

So it is a shovel-ready project. 

We could be out of the ground and doing neighboring works within a month of a funding line. 

The key for myself and the board will be what are the tags that the government apply if we are successful to the funding mechanism? 

How much of it is the loan as a grant, etc.? That's underway. 

Next part of our recovery program. 

So if we go to the next slide, being important as we work through really the devastation of the past three or four weeks to make sure that we still keep our eye on the longer term for the group in our focus over the next 12 months. 

I won't spend any detailed time here other than to let you know that we have a clear set of clear business plan and a clear set of objectives for FY 21. 

Most of those remain in place. We are reviewing them currently as a management team, but we are trying to make sure that we continue property as a major contributor, even as you can see there, potentially to shy of eight million dollars in land sales in this next 12-month period. 

Operations, we continue to maintain the runway. 

Fortunately, in our ten-year asset management plan, we have a very quiet. 

We just spent close to a million dollars finishing in March of this year on some apron works and some pumps, some other bits and pieces. 

But we have a very quiet couple of expenditures for nautical over the next 12 to 18 months, which couldn't have come at a better time. 

But we maintain the assets, and you need to know that we will, when it comes to, we'll be working very closely with New Zealand to try and obviously kickstart services again. 

And so our whole marketing and social media and common strategy will be around exactly that. 

The hotel is a much more difficult beast, as you would have gained from Jason's presentation. 

But look, we are working now closely with Jet Park to understand what a weather plan coming out the other side may look like. 

Fortunately, it's a hotel that wasn't reliant on international tourism, but it is reliant on conferencing in particular. 

And we get to understand the behavior of the business community as we go forward in this new world. 

So we have just almost spent most of four million on the hotel just prior to lockdown. 

So it is a property that we're going to have to maintain in the meantime and fund, and our conservative modeling does mean that the group can fund its interests in the hotel Sydney for the next 18 months with limited activity from it. 

And if we move now into the next slide, which is probably the financial certain couple of slides here on sort of financials and all. 

Scott, lead us now. 

Our overarching comment here would be you had a lot of detail in the six-month interim results, so we decided there was no point in replicating information you will have read. 

So Scott will summarize it here and more importantly take you out the other side of years. 

Brad, good afternoon, everyone, and thanks for Max's introduction. 

Yeah, I won't dwell too much on the past because it's unfortunately become largely irrelevant. 

But I guess just some key takeaways to the slide and what you may have read already in the interim report. 

But really that momentum we built in the past couple of years around a sustainable, so recurring revenue basis through passenger growth in the airport business. 

I'm sure a property portfolio that it continued really well for the first half of the year, and you know, obviously without COVID-19, we expected to continue through the full year and beyond. 

Yeah, it's just the points are properly obviously talking some big numbers really in sales. 

I guess that they are land sales that have been contemplated under a ten-year plan. 

The lens doesn't quite line. It's not something that we've done as a knee-jerk reaction or sort of a fire sale type arrangement just to get some cash in the next couple of years. 

These are on the land we're selling as sort of surplus to your Oracle requirements. 

Effectively, much of it's actually physically separated from the airport through a gallery system, so we're not compromising any core asset sort of future capability by selling this land. 

Very much as lender service the airport's, that's why it's being sold off time. 

It has been, yes, just with the hotel. 

You see it as a new investment for us, a new industry would be Siddhant. 

Really pleased with the early trading performance. 

Yeah, and probably pleasing that we didn't, other than the initial money to do the property app tenders and deferred maintenance and things, it's actually traded cash. 

So positive, he has much been profitable with depreciation and things, but really able to repay some debt. 

And you know, the early vital signs were an occupancy in rem rate have been certainly in line with expectation. 

And again, kind of right up until February-March, it was really just coming into its stride around the conference center and the food and beverage offerings. 

So yeah, I think, you know, it was looking really positive, and hopefully, on the other side, that's the momentum we can leverage off again. 

So probably look to the future now. Just move to the next slide, please. 

Yes, I've given here just sort of a six-month increment for the remainder of the financial year. 

I'm also fighting sure that we're in, and then the following three that are presented and the drafts then in a material received. 

I think it's important to focus on a bit there because it's sort of a cash flow metric for us that includes then sales, but it excludes, of course, costs like depreciation, which is around three million dollars here for us, which in the short term, there's not necessarily linear worth they with the investment we make into assets. 

So seeing, I'll see seeing a reasonably significant decline in the next, and this calendar year with across the business certainly going to suffer omits as we see in that sort of early six months between December twenty and Jo next year. 

That's the effect of this largely, and so I'm taking your feet. 

I mean, as the business kind of gets back on its feet, you can see it's slowly back to cash flow positive. 

So I guess you want to compare the read, the read in the blue bars and red line, and the Green Line is subtly we think we can ahead now. 

You can see you're definitely next to the fifteen to eighteen months. 

It's going to be a bit painful, but after they're pretty much back on their feet, they're not becoming heavily reliant on our land sales. 

Certainly, a person takes 18 months. 

So we've only seen what's already under contract and wants unconditional CTUL and those numbers. 

So I think that's the conservative but realist looking and conservative on both fronts. 

I'm sitting at it costs. We're looking to road out of the business on anything that's going to compromise this long term. 

We're not giving out capability, but either we've built or with managed to hang on to for as long as we have. 

But it's, yeah, definitely conservative. 

And look, if things don't play out the way and we see them doing, and certainly not as positive as they might do, there's some opportunities if they're that. 

But for now, it's this sort of as realistic that we can preserve a current capability anyway. 

Yeah, I guess just overlaid a neat profit slide. 

Yeah, there's a lot more probably the deficits are bigger, largely because of the effect of depreciation. 

But ultimately, following a really similar tree into the cash flow, that layer in sales over the next 18 months will give us cash flow positive. 

And we expect by the end of Bustles to be largely cash flow positive from its recurring trading to be sustainable. 

And yeah, that's probably, I guess, the main takeaway there. 

And it's not really built into the slides, but just as much on the balance sheet, like we speak, there will be some impacts to our balance sheet around property values and those sort of equity movements. 

So as a shareholder, that obviously will impact your accounts as well. 

But I guess out of this, as a shareholder and an on fire or sense out of all of us, we're preserving our core capability, and we're not compromising any of it in nautical capability. 

I think yet in terms of what the service will keep delivering, that shouldn't be compromised or at least our ability to do it. 

That was really all I had just view the financials somewhat beep aspect to wrap up. 

This is their last slide. 

My apologies, that's it. We've taken a bit of your time, but look, I think the key themes here really are, as I opened up, we hit this situation in a very strong position and in a very strong balance sheet, a record year. 

The fourth side of the diversification through our ten-year group strategy has, I think, really bought this company time. 

Pretz, unlike some other regional airports that I think will need to go to their shareholders very quickly for additional funding or through their bank funding lines, we don't need to do that. 

Non-revenue has been absolutely critical to - and in fact, ironically, we never predicted a COVID-19 scenario, but we did predict a loss of aeronautical income through cessation of services or reduced services. 

So it has been one on the same. 

And look, overall, the recovery, as Scott has mentioned, will be modest but sustainable. 

And as I want to keep restating, we won't need to go to our core deep at this stage or funding lines to fund this. 

We can fund it out of an effective working capital. 

And most importantly, I think for you as this year holders, there is no requirement for the board to come to its shareholders for support, and we don't see a scenario at all that requires the shareholders to assist the company in the foreseeable future. 

So that's it from me. Sorry and drug. 

Apologize if we're over time, but happy to take questions if you've got time. 

Yeah, no thanks, guys. I think we were aware that a bit of extra time was going to be required for you guys with such a massive impact. 

And I just got a quick question about the flight school and when would they not get back to level one or possibly could they operate in level two? 

When in fact, Scott's just hit some advice today. 

It could well be that the pilots that are that are will through their qualification will be able to start flying under level three. 

So as soon as next week, we could see some flight activity, but it will be, to your point, Andrew, down at level one probably. 

But there'll be the social distancing issues when you have an instructor and a trainee pilot on board. 

So I think we still are unclear, and so are all three as to when that will be. 

I think it's worth noting that we don't quite know where we're going to go with all three in the sense that they've got a hundred, one hundred and eighty pilots currently at the airport and in Hamilton or out at the accommodation at the airport. 

So I think we will fight there fine for the next few months. 

The question is how whether they're going to beat the logistics of moving pilots across borders for training and actually pilots. 

There is not a dearth of pilots in the global marketplace as a result of the catastrophe for the airlines. 

So I think those two would suggest to us that we've got difficult times ahead, place the end of 2020 with level three. 

Yeah, that makes sense. 

Yeah, I think it's, as you've both noted, the stage that you're at with your property development has been a very fortunate thing. 

If this had occurred at the beginning of that, it would have been far more, if I naturally just... 

But does anyone else have any queries? 

Okay, that not being the case, thank you very much for a really comprehensive update. 

And great to see you recovered from the shock and being really positive and constructive going forward. 

So thanks very much to you both. 

Thank you, ma'am. 

Yes, and I see Andrew Michael is available and will talk to us about the LGFA. 

Thank you for the opportunity. 

And I just maybe make a few brief comments and then touch on the current environment and then leave some time for questions. 

So LGFA started in 2012. 

It currently has 67 member councils. We're the number of others in the process of joining. 

And the current environment has probably just, you know, even for the councils that don't have any, they realize that, you know, having access to finances is important, sort of probably speeding up, you know, their timetable for joining. 

And LGFA is based on similar models in the Scandinavian countries. 

The longest of those is endemic. That's been going for 130 years now. 

So what LGFA wants us to be is a very long-term provider of financing to the local authority sector. 

The objectives interest savings on councils did to provide a range of borrowing options, so short-term and longer-term financing. 

And probably the most important one is access to deep markets. 

And that's been the area that has been the most challenging. 

And over the past couple of months, in terms of the financials, the profit for the year to June 2020, which was forecast to be 10 million, is on track. 

I even ran the part numbers for April yesterday, and again, the monthly profit is on track. 

A lot of the forecasting that's in the draft is just out of date. 

It's superseded by the events that we've seen in the last few months. 

But that said, just remember that LGFA has ten billion dollars of lending to the sector. 

We borrow from investors, and on land, and every time we do, we take a small margin. 

So the profit read on all that lending is locked until those loans mature. 

So even though there may well be some variability in profit, a lot of others as a lot turn. 

That's it. The profitability probably shouldn't be your primary concern. 

It is where councils get the savings on the interest costs and certainty around accessing finance. 

So that's probably the key thing. 

The current environment, interest rates low, so maybe that's one little bit of good news for councils. 

So short-term interest rates, councils like yourself can borrow below one percent now. 

Longer-term, we just completed a one billion dollar debt issue just over a week ago. 

So we borrowed for six years, and we borrowed up 1.46 percent for a billion dollars. 

So we will add on 20 points to councils or 25 points to Waipa, I think it is. 

So you'll be accessing longer-term money, six-year money, around 1.7 percent, just to give you some idea of borrowing costs. 

So that's, you know, one bit of good news. 

Probably two or three weeks ago, we were receiving recall borrowing or quiz from councils. 

There's a lot of councils knowing that maybe, you know, fee income is dropping, and they needed to get more money into to cover that. 

So we've never had a month we have had a higher amount of borrowing costs. 

The LGFA was the first count of this non-government entity, well entity other than the government, to issue in New Zealand since the level four lockdown was imposed. 

For a while, investors were very reluctant to invest. 

It's just, you know, they're worried even if we buy, we won't be able to sell things, and it's just that whole risk aversion that we had. 

Two developments: one was LGFA having a one billion dollar standby facility from the New Zealand government that expires next year. 

But the Minister of Finance provided a letter to LGFA saying that the government would roll that over the period of time. 

So that support from the government was just a, it's really symbolic to investors that there's going to be there ongoing support from the government for what LGFA does. 

The second thing that occurred is the Reserve Bank announced that they were going to buy back government bonds. 

And subsequent to that, they added LGFA to the list of securities that they are able to buy. 

So they signaled that buy back up to three billion dollars of LGFA bonds from investors. 

And it was that that really gave the confidence to investors that if we buy them, there's actually going to be another huge buyer in the market for that. 

So again, you know, the level of support that we're getting from the government has been extremely important. 

There's going to be significant challenges for councils, particularly in the 2021 sort of financial year. 

Part of the working group that DIA are running, looking at doing a lot of modeling on council financial performance this well for the remainder of this year and in next year. 

Our next feeding into a lot of the other government sort of work streams such as the recovery sort of a weak stream. 

So there's some quite sobering reading coming out of it for Waipa. 

You're probably well positioned in terms of your debt levels, not high relative to some of the other higher growth councils in New Zealand. 

So yeah, there are a lot of challenges, and that's probably one of the challenges for us is that potentially we're going to get breaches of the financial covenants in the next financial year, not this financial year. 

So today we've never had a breach of any of the financial covenants, but you know, if revenue falls significantly for councils worth a large amount of debt to start, then they could well break that neck-deep to revenue covenant. 

So that's something we'll have to deal with. 

But for those growth councils, you know, one of the last tools they've really got is, you know, having to cut their capex. 

And again, that's not particularly conducive to starting growth in the economy and is working against a little bit of what the government wants to achieve. 

So I just like to, you know, we appreciate that there's no compulsion for councils to use LGFA. 

You're still free to borrow from any other sources that you want. 

So I just like to acknowledge that Waipa and the team, because Waipa was one of the early supporters of LGFA. 

We very much value your support of us and, you know, the professional relationship that we have. 

Thanks, Andrew. I think, yeah, almost goes without saying, but I'll say it anyway. 

LGFA is another great contributor to the local government scene generally, and certainly, while I guess Waipa hasn't used your services that greatly, we certainly intend to in the future, possibly even more with COVID, possibly not. 

We don't know yet, do we? 

That's true. We don't know, but yeah, but you're very comforted by their time. 

But does anyone else have any questions? 

Bruce, and then clear. You're still muted, Bruce. 

Press the spacebar. 

I don't need to keep creasing it, mate. 

Okay, I'll change machines. One doesn't work. 

So once in the Bernsen entry, just down page 33, she Kavanagh - white has got 200 fares, and she is at that point four percent. 

Just a simple one. 

Well, Waipa District, you've got SS but a nine point nine. 

Never foreseen. Did you explain that? 

Yes, the shareholding is just something sort of historical. 

So we know LGFA was started at needed 25 million of equity. 

So there was, I think, nine or ten councils that were the initial subscribers, and then they won sold some of the issues to a second group of councils that came in as shareholders. 

So LGFA pays a small dividend to councils on their shareholding that is 2 percent over cost of funds. 

But our cost of funds might only be like one and a half percent at the moment. 

So on a hundred thousand dollars of shares, you're only going to be getting right the three or four thousand dollar dividend. 

So that is really not material. 

So the level of equity you have is really not that important. 

It is the savings that you get on your borrowing costs that are going to be the big drivers of why councils should be means of members of LGFA. 

So it really doesn't give you a lot of advantage about, you know, a council bit as a non-shareholder because, again, you're still getting the same borrowing benefits that you are. 

It's just simply effect we needed some councils to put in some equity to get the thing off the ground. 

So again, you know, we're grateful for the councils that did that. 

I think it interested of doubling a figure in banking and in ordinary terms of thinking, well, here the head you get today. 

So no, thank you. 

I just whipped it out for you, Bruce. 

It's a rounding thing. 

It's actually you got point four four four of a percent, and when you double it, you get point eight eight. 

So it's just rounding up and down. 

Thank you, Mr. Chair. You're so knowledgeable. 

All clear? 

Oh yeah, thanks, Lucretia. 

My head is about LGFA saying one of their principles is that they'll demonstrate social and environmental responsibility. 

And one question that I've been asking in the past is will LGFA consider introducing something like green financing or environmental bonds? 

You know, like the Productivity Commission did report to a no emissions economy, you know, years ago. 

They highlighted that actually there's a bit of a gap in New Zealand with this kind of financing where councils could borrow for a project that would be, you know, reducing emissions or for environmental outcomes. 

And usually, it's at a slight margin lease or something, and just to say it's a good thing to be doing, and we want to encourage councils to do. 

Do you think LGFA would do that, or are you talking to government about that? 

I thank you for that question. 

The whole environmental issues have been pushed a little bit to the back at the moment because that's going on. 

But LGFA has done a significant amount of work on it, and we are intending to offer green financing to councils. 

So remembering that it's not LGFA that is doing things with the money. 

We just saw and lending resources. 

We've actually got all the documents up and ready to go, but the issue is we're going to need councils to identify green projects. 

Also, there's three categories of this: green, social, and sustainable. 

So for example, a lot of the water things actually come under sustainable. 

So there's a whole industry around it, and it involves identifying things, and also there's a certification process of Dom net. 

So I could probably speak if a day on this topic because it, as if you see the documents, they, you know, it must be like a hundred pages long, and we've got all that really to go. 

So it is all happening, but it will be, it's not going to be compulsory. 

It will be up to each council to check how they use that. 

But green investing is a big theme globally, probably particularly in Europe, probably least so in the US. 

But certainly, it does give you better access to deep markets if you can visit the green framework. 

Well, I'm thrilled to hear that you're working on it. 

I actually think you should report on it, say that you're actually preparing or, you know, working on a proposal because I think a lot of people would be looking for that. 

And yeah, disable congratulations. 

I think it's great that you made some, I suppose, so ground with progress, and you look forward to seeing you. 

I mean, you can actually make an announcement. 

Yeah, we don't flip. 

We have a council day each year sort of in July, and we did flag that it was something we intend to do. 

So we would, you know, got the update again this year, but it is something that's definitely happening, and we're more than happy to come and speak to you if you want to know more in-depth discussion about their business. 

Any other questions for Andrew? 

No? Okay, well, thank you very much for zooming with us. 

And yeah, always good. 

Might see you in person one of these days. 

Yeah, please. 

Okay, thanks very much. 

Cheers. 

Okay, well, thanks for that, everybody. 

We have a recommendation that runs from A to G. 

I'm not even going to attempt to read them all out, Kim. 

Yeah, sorry, Andrew. 

Probably the thing we just need to turn our engine to because obviously a key part of that and there's a series of recommendations as the three letters that are in them and the appendices of open deck, some appendix four, five, and six. 

So I do just wonder whether just before you pop the recommendation, we've read as just with I'm just seeking in IAM any input into those and those three meters because obviously when we knew to do proper recommendation, you will be a century mocking in those weavers. 

Yeah, stinks further keen. 

You're very right. 

I did think of it. 

I read through them, and I felt they seemed pretty appropriate as they are because particularly with Oh custom wine being there, particularly with the airport, we acknowledged that there was going to be a major revision in theory. 

So I, and but yeah, is there anyone, does anyone have any thoughts on a no? 

All good? Thanks for that, Kim, but I think we're all good. 

So could I have a mover, please? 

Thank you, Bruce, and a seconder? 

Thanks, Lou. 

All in favor, aye. 

Aye. Contrary, no. That's carried. 

Okay, moving on to item number nine, and I see Nod as their king. 

Did you want to introduce or? 

No, look, I'm very happy to leave this sound to - Nada to him to take us through the
